Anza is the company behind all of the
validator codebase that is on the Solana
network today. First, how do you define
what is SVM?
>> Technically speaking, the SVM is the
state transition function
>> for developers who are new to crypto,
people who are coming from the EVM side
of the world. How should they understand
SVM?
>> We do have actually an instruction set
architecture that lays out what all the
op codes of the VM are. We do have that
>> SPM execution environment is actually
the EBPF and then we have special op
codes on top of that. Why EBPF was
chosen?
>> I mean the core reason it was just
easier to do. So like
>> do you have a any specific repositories
that you recommend people look at when
you have both these set of tests?
>> I would say the solid program or has a
lot of
>> how are people using SVM APIs?
>> Well, you can build a state channel with
>> Hello, welcome to another episode of the
one dev spark. Today is a special
episode. We have Joe who is an engineer
at Anza and Anza is the company behind
all of the validator codebase that you
that is on the Sana network today and
welcome to the podcast Joe.
>> Thanks guys. Thanks for having me.
>> This is a question that we ask everyone.
It's a standard in the podcast. What
pulled you into crypto? Uh
>> so like for me I was this was like 2019
maybe or no I'm sorry maybe like a
little after 2020 like a little bit
towards the end of the pandemic I was
working at a bank and I had actually
gotten a software engineering job like
the first job that I had because I was
doing something totally different before
I was like basically mowing lawns and
like just doing stuff like that like
snowplowing and I was like getting into
coding and I got my first job at a bank
and I quickly realized that like a lot
of people were kind of like complacent
and I was really more interested in
working on like some cutting edge stuff
and like really crazy interesting cool
tech and I went to some of these like
conferences like uh permissionless and
like a lot of hacker houses and stuff
like that and I was like a felt like I
was like like having an affair like I
was like sneaking out and like going to
these conferences on the weekend and
like coming back to work on Monday and
eventually I was just like I figured
this is probably where I was going up
and then I met some cool people from
Foundation down in Florida during a
hackathon and I was making YouTube
videos for like how to build on Salana
and some of those videos people still
watch like I still get notifications
about them and I was like passing out
business cards at the hackathon like hey
if you guys are like looking to build on
Salana like here's my channel and I was
like chilling myself and they hired me
which was pretty sweet and so that was
like my start at Salana and then um and
I had already gone to the hacker houses
and I building on Salana, some cool
stuff. And then I started working there
and like building like doing onchain
program work as like reference material
and like doing like education and stuff
like that. And then eventually made my
way over to labs because like I was just
doing enough onchain work that they kind
of knew that I knew the stuff. I knew
the tax stack or the tech stack for um
like onchain work and I've been working
in like an engineering capacity since
then.
>> That's awesome. So what what do you
focus on today at Dan? For example, if
when I saw your GitHub, you have
comments across a variety of repos,
right? Like uh Molesk uh Kodama then in
into a way and some of the core programs
as well. So what's your area of focus
at?
>> I'm kind of like I'm I'm definitely
spread across quite a few locations, but
I I tend to focus around like the realm
of onchain programs. So like I've
written a lot of programs, I've worked
on a lot of our programs and then um
I've worked on a lot of like tooling
that is focused on those programs and
also like the parts of the execution
layer which I know you guys want to talk
about today which I think it'll be
sweet. Um so like a lot of stuff that
has to do with just like deploying
programs to Salana and like everything
in between, right? So like to list a
couple things specifically
um I worked a lot on like decoupling our
SVM which we call SVM we can get into
that as well what's what but the API
that you would use to build like a
network extension or a rollup so like
decoupling that um did some refactoring
internal to that those components as
well to just help things run smoother um
worked on a lot of onchain programs that
we use internally or like other programs
that like we've worked on for other
people that like help them out and stuff
and then tooling like testing harnesses
and um yeah I've contributed to things
like kodama and I don't think I have any
commits on Pinocchio yet but I got to
change that soon but yes all kinds of
stuff like that
>> how do you even define start defining
SVM because when you look at the the
runtime I guess it was called sea level
in in the beginning right so it make the
runtime makes up so many different
things it's the state it's the storage
it's also the scheduling How do you def
first how do you define what is SVM like
if you if you have to
>> so technically speaking the SVM is the
state transition function of Solana. So
like if you give me a set of inputs and
you get a result that the inputs are
going to be accounts and input data and
then the result is going to be changes
to that account state and some code
right and there's like logs and whatever
else but the point is like that right
there that transition function is SVM
and like in the stack where that
actually happens is technically like
within the program runtime. So like the
way that I and a lot of people will like
debate exactly what constitutes SVM or
not, but the way that I envision it is
like everything that is involved with
like executing a batch of transactions,
it all distills down to like what are
the programs in your transaction. And
there's obviously like usually many or
multiple of them. And so for each one,
there's going to be a a stage that will
load that program and execute it with
the inputs that are in the transaction.
And that right there, I think, is the
SPM. That's the state transition
function. That's where accounts actually
change. Now, obviously, you can make an
argument that like the transaction piece
is like a necessary part because it's
atomic, but technically the way that it
works in the in the actual runtime is
all those changes do happen. It's just
they get committed to the block later if
the transaction is successful, but they
still occurred. The state transition
function still exists. So, that's the
way I define it. It's that that
transition between the inputs that you
give a program and what the result is of
it and like everything else besides that
is runtime or or banking stage to be
more proper and like banking stage
includes runtime. Taking a step back
right for example for developers who are
new to crypto or people who are coming
from the EVM side of the world how
should they understand SVM because when
you look at EVM they have like a
specific op code the virtual machine
works in a specific way uh so when we
come draw a parallel to SVM what what is
the best way for them to understand what
SVM is
>> that's a good question I mean obviously
the two are quite
But we do have actually an instruction
set architecture that lays out what all
the op codes of the VM are. We do have
that. So if you want to look at like how
the actual Salana virtual machine works,
the one that is supposed to implement
EVPF and is supposed to like execute
your programs, that one is defined and
the op codes are all listed in the SPF
repo. Um, as far as the other stuff
goes, we don't do a great job of like
specking everything out. And that's like
a product of like most of it having
built like super quickly and like
launching. And so it's taken us a long
time to go back and actually like spec
this stuff out. And maybe we should, but
what's missing I think that like the
difficult piece for EVM people coming
over is like what is the spec for
basically everything above the VM,
right? So like
the most EVM devs aren't used to like
having to specify all the different
accounts that are going to be involved
in something, marking them as readable,
writable, things like that. And that can
be a little bit like verbose and
annoying.
And I think that's the cusp of where
we're missing a lot of like
specification is like how do these
accounts actually get used into
different ex program executions? like
how does the like thread pool work that
determines which can be like used in the
same batch and that has actually changed
recently, you know, because like
previously a batch had to be
non-conlicting.
And so like if even one account was
going to be written to, it needs to go
in one batch and then like it needs to
appear again in a later batch if it
wants to be written to again. But now
that doesn't do that anymore. So the
spec would have changed recently again.
So we're missing some specs in that
area. Basically all the stuff that makes
Solana like go burr with like the
accounts being paralyzable that's all
like pretty unrespected. I think
>> you mentioned EVPF, right? Like a lot
lot of lot of the SVM execution
environment is actually the EVPF and
then we have special op codes on top of
that. That's actually an interesting
choice.
C can you talk about why EVPF was chosen
as a
you know the execution runtime versus
something like was
>> I mean the core reason that they picked
EVPF so there's like there's a couple
like main engineering focused reasons
then there's also one that was like it
was just easier to do so like on the
first on the on the engineering side it
it is like a known standard and a pretty
performant way to do like it was used in
in packet filtering and in networking.
And so like it it's a fast way to do
like an ISA for like a VM for different
kinds of sandboxed environments. And so
it was really useful for the performance
that you could get out of it and also
for the sandboxing capabilities that the
VM offered. So like you could have this
like isolated architecture where like
everything that happened is say is like
self-contained and that works great for
like a blockchain because that way you
know that like nothing that happens
within this VM is going to like panic a
validator right so that was huge and the
other thing that I was alluding to is
like there was already an implementation
in Rust available from this guy named
Quinton who we forked it from a long
time ago this is long before my time and
so that was probably a huge help already
as well is having something that you
could build off of without having to
start from scratch and things like that.
Now, I don't know what like what was
maybe around or prevalent at the time as
far as like something that could have
been used instead. I know nowadays we've
talked quite a bit about looking into
risk 5. I don't know if that's going to
happen or not, but it's something that's
maybe worth exploring because it's
getting popularity.
But, I mean, to this day, like EVPF is
still pretty quick. So unless like
there's really a lot of like compelling
reasons to switch it, I don't think the
switching cost is really worth it. But
we'll see.
>> Interesting. It it's also interesting
that you mentioned uh you know
supporting risk five, right? So is a
part of the modeler argument today is
that so that you can we you have the
ability to upgrade some of these
components independently. Yeah, I think
it's also we could also talk about why
model, right? Like why move from a
monolithic integrated design into a
modeler at least at the codebased level.
>> Well, so like my take on this is like if
you if you have like a lot of well
decoupled components in a validator like
if you think about it the validator is
pretty big, right? Like there's actually
a lot of stuff in there. And if you can
decouple a lot of components in like a
sensible way, you know, not just like
every little thing needs to be like its
own isolated component, but at least
sensible buckets of performance and
functionality. You could actually have
like a lot of plug-andplay for different
validator clients. So imagine a world
where like the labs client that we had
for years is like this big
like machine that runs all these
different blocks of components and
somebody wants to like change one of
them. They could just fork one component
and they could change that one component
and plug it in and like this is what JTO
does. But because they do that, like
there is no like easy way for them to
plug their changes in. So they have to
maintain a fork and have done that for
years. And sometimes it's not so bad,
sometimes it sucks because they have to
like upstream all the cherry picks and
like get all the changes from the
client. And that's like not really a fun
process for anyone to maintain like a
like a fork or a mod or anything like
that. So if you imagine the scenario I
was I was like sort of laying up. If I'm
like a node operator and I want to
change like one or two components, I can
easily do that and then I can keep
getting updated software as Anza
releases new updates and I just have to
worry about like updating my piece, you
know, or like bringing in the features
that have been added to that little
piece. And so then you end up with like
a network that has a really good spread
of many different versions of many
components. And so like a lot of people
talk about the benefit of having someone
like Fire Dancer or even Cheeto like for
the same reasons because like if there's
a bug in Agave for example and hopefully
it's not in the other client then you
have part of the network that can still
run. You can apply the same concept to
individual components. So, like if you
have a bug in one component and
everybody's mod maybe doesn't have it or
like some mods have it, some mods don't,
like you have actually a little bit more
resilience that way as well for the same
reasons that you get it for having
multiple clients. But obviously the main
benefit like that's a huge one too. But
the main benefit is like you can do a
lot more innovation on top of Agave
without having to worry about like all
this crazy coupled code that you're
going to have to update every time
there's changes to somewhere in the
stack. And it's really a pain. So it
would be nice and it would I mean my
like longot idea is like if we did have
that you could have people like commit
stuff back. I've said this many times
before and it hasn't happened, but you
could have people commit stuff back and
be like, "Hey, I've been tinkering with
this. Like, I have this fork of
whatever. Like, I really think the
protocol should just do this or like the
base validator should just do this and
you guys should like blah blah blah."
And you make a case for it and then
suddenly it's maintained along with the
like flagship validator and then like
you can push the the cluster along with
like new tech. So I know there's a lot
of benefits I think but it's mostly for
people who just want to tinker around
that you know.
>> Yeah it's also interesting you mentioned
that because it kind of drawing these
clear interface interfaces and
boundaries between different components
kind of also you know gives you the
interfaces actually become specs for
these components. So in a way it kind of
starts documenting what these components
are and how they are supposed to behave.
So that now it makes it much more easier
for someone to build a new thing and
potentially also upscreen it if that is
a good reason for it.
>> Absolutely. That would be awesome.
That's ideal because then you have like
a well- definfined interface, a spec and
then you know how to hook into it.
>> You you mentioned different mods, right?
I'm curious to double click on what type
of mods are people running or typically
what especially around these specific
which which of these components are
people actually modifying and why?
>> There's quite a few that people tend to
mess with. So like you can you can mod
things like Geyser if you want to like
get more information extracted from your
node and you could have like different
infrastructure that you have alongside
of it. Maybe you have like some cloud
databases or whatever. You're tracking
different telemetry.
You can also add more telemetry in
general. But the most popular one for
any operator to mod is going to be the
block producing agent like anything that
has to do with producing a block. So
like basically your scheduler and
obviously the reason is for me, right?
You want to try to try your hand at
ordering a block in a way that you think
is going to be most profitable. And like
some people just run Cheeto and they do
like the auction method and they go
through some of the like the mechanisms
that they offer and some people do it
themselves. They like they have their
own custom setup and that's mostly what
people do. And I think that that's
that's not necessarily a bad thing. It's
just that um like it can be a little bit
like wild west. So, one of the nice
things is I think we're moving towards a
future where like that's a little bit
more decoupled like we were just talking
about and so you have like a validator
that is not so tightly wound with the
different scheduler components and you
can actually like plug in more stuff in
there. And then ideally the second step
is like here are some standards now that
we know like
external third party or just decoupled
block producing in general is like no
longer this like fringe forking thing.
It's like a pluggable thing. Then you
can start to have like standards. But
yeah, I would say that anything block
producing is obviously going to be the
biggest one that people mod. you you
also mentioned network extensions being
like a use case for you know having
these components right so I'm curious to
know like what what what is like the
spectrum of changes this uh you know
this network extensions who don't
necessarily sit within the main salon
network but are kind of like extending
the network right what kind of
modifications do they make is there do
people mess around with how the state is
stored for example the accounts DB or
even uh maybe even even possibly the
runtime as well, right? If the if the
SPM API doesn't like strictly enforce it
being a you know a SPF shared object, it
could be a risk by binary as well,
right? the different extensions that I
know about that are true extensions and
not like SPM L2s for like another base
chain.
Um those it seems to be common that
people want to do like
permissioned environments
or like state channels
and like those are pretty like classic
examples. But for those people who don't
know, like a permission environment is
obviously you just you're kind of like
forking the Salona runtime, but you're
still like compatible with all the
primitives. However, you can add and
omit some of the things that will still
allow you to be consensus compatible.
So, for example, let's say that I want
to have like a side chain, but I don't
want to do staking. So, you just like
create a fork and then you just don't
have a stake program. Or maybe you want
to do one where like you don't have
token 22, right? Or there's like certain
restrictions on token 22 extensions that
are enforced at a protocol level. That's
pretty easy to do as like an extension.
And so there's quite legitimate use
cases there too. And I think we'll see
more with like some of the stable coin
legislation, but for now I don't think
there's too many extensions yet. So
we'll probably see more. How are people
using SVM APIs to to build state
channels?
>> Well, you can build a state channel with
the API without having to worry about
any of the rest of the of the cluster.
So, you don't need to like fork a
validator or spin up like a cluster to
do just like simple payments or if you
have like a well- definfined standard of
state transitions, um you can really
simplify everything. So, like the
classic one is going to be just
transfers. So if you want to do just
like sole transfers like imagine imagine
you and I want to set up like a we want
to set up like a P2P network within our
let's say we have like an app or we're a
bank. You can just like take the SVM API
and you can like load account state from
Salana that are like owned by your
program. So like you don't have to worry
about them like rugging underneath. And
then you do all the payment processing
on your little like extension layer and
then you settle it like periodically to
the accounts that are on the base chain.
And like you can see that first of all
you can probably make that a little bit
faster. But the nice thing too is you
can aggregate changes too. So you can
say like I'm going to keep track of just
like the delta of everybody's balance
and I'll do that settlement later. So
it's like I don't need to post every del
like balance change to the main chain
every time. And so you save on fees,
right? So you don't have to just you
don't have to tell Salana every time
somebody makes a transfer. You just wait
for like maybe like a minute or two
minutes or an hour, whatever you want to
do. And then you take the final ledger
and you put that to the chain and you're
going to save on fees likely orders of
magnitude. And then like anyone
depending on what the app that they're
running, you can easily sprinkle in some
of the permission stuff we were talking
about too. So it's like, oh, you can
make these kind of payments. You got
like payment limits, blah blah blah. But
that's that's up to whoever is
implementing that. But that's that's the
most common way you could use a state
channel. If you don't want to do just
payments though, you can do it in just
about any kind of transition you want.
The idea is you can make it
hyperfocused. So you could say like
here's a program that defines our like
transition functions that this account
can do and like the state channel can do
and then as long as you can still update
those to the base chain like your
program on the base chain and on the on
the extension are compatible or
otherwise matching you can do it with
just about any kind of state transition
function. The idea is you're not just
like this all-encompassing any third
party software channel. You're a focused
thing, but you use the same API, the
same like primitives and everything as
the base and it's quite easy to rectify
everything at the end.
>> That's awesome. And all of this is
possible because of the refactoring you
mentioned, right? And where all of these
components were tightly coupled now
since you have decoupled them, you can
take the pieces and you know start using
them in different contexts. I'm curious
to know what was the I the most
challenging f part of decoupling
you know doing this refactor.
>> Um definitely the bank I don't know if
you guys have looked at like the code in
the bank but it's a really really big
file and it used to be even bigger and
um I didn't actually start the
refactoring. There was a couple of us
working on it and I jumped in later and
thankfully a lot of that was like in
flight already. So I just jumped in and
started pulling stuff out of bank
myself.
But whoever started the effort
originally probably I think it was this
guy named Pankage. He was probably the
one who had to deal with the most like
oh my god where do I even start?
Because that file used to be massive.
It's still huge but it used to be even
bigger. So that one definitely sucked.
It needs more refactoring, but nobody
like has time to go take that on yet.
>> That's awesome. It's switching gears
into Moleskisk.
It's like
why why build mole? Like why is it
important also? Why why would
when when does a dev choose you know for
their testing? Why should they choose
something like monisk over the sana
program test which most if anyone is
already writing some of their tests in
rust they're already familiar with right
so what was the thought process behind
monesk oh basically
so it's a pretty versatile like test
harness so you can use it for a lot of
different things and we've actually seen
a lot of people come up with pretty cool
use cases besides what it was intended
for but the original idea was that we
needed a good test harness that would
let you write unit tests really easily.
And the problem with things like program
test was that it just brought with it so
many things that you just like really
didn't need. And so it it would bring
with you like a bank like I was just
talking about how big the bank file is.
Like the bank itself is quite large and
so it does a lot of stuff. So bring like
the runtime and if you're testing a
program and like if you're doing unit
tests you really want to test one case
on one instruction at a time and each
test is a different case and like each
test suite is a different instruction.
At least that's the pattern that I think
most people should follow. Well, I mean
ultimately devs could do whatever they
want, but like that's my suggestion. And
that was how we were writing tests, but
it was really like verbose and annoying.
And then we would also get a lot of
problems as our test suites grew because
like if you spin up too many program
test instances, you end up with like
timeouts.
And so I wrote this thing that basically
just says, "All right, give me the
accounts and the instruction data and
I'll just invoke the program on the VM
and that's it." It's like I won't bring
any of the bank or the stakes cache or
any of the other stuff that like you
don't really need and I won't even
persist the account changes. I'll just
give you like we talked about the state
transition function, the SPM like STF.
That's all it is. It's just the
transition function. And so you can test
exactly what you're trying to see from
the VM like from the program using this
harness.
And I will say that like most people I
think have found that quite useful. Some
people get a little bit tripped up here
and there sometimes because it can be a
little bit like explicit, but it's
that's kind of the point. And I've added
some features over time to make that
less like less of a of an obstacle when
people are trying to get onboarded to
it. So there is like a persistent
account store and there's stuff like
that if you wanted to expand on some of
the writing but the core like tenant of
the harness itself was like each test is
one case of one instruction and you just
do like you spin up a mollisk instance
and then you just like invoke it and you
can also like keep a moist instance
around and like keep invoking it too.
And so there's like other goodies in
there too like you can record and
benchmark your compute units and stuff
like that. But that was the motivation
and so far so good. I mean we use it all
over the place and I think it it works
well for that intended use case.
>> Interesting. So the idea is that so
moisk actually shaves off all the the
expensive setup and tear down times. For
examp if I were to set up a entire
bank's client every for every unit test
case that I have to run tens of padding
a lot of time. So molesk makes it much
much more faster. So now it is I could
actually run it on GitHub CI. Is that
the
>> Yeah, it's it's a lot less resource
intensive for sure. The other nice thing
too is like I I'm obviously a little
biased, but I think that the some of the
setup is a little bit more like
customizable.
So like when you're working with like
program test and you have like a bank in
there that you need to work with, you
have to be careful when you do certain
updates. So like there some of these
things were just bugs that we just could
have maybe gone and fixed, but like a
number of things I would run into was
you would need to set up some accounts
and you would want to test with these
accounts. And so you have two options.
You can either set them all up ahead of
time and then like run your tests with
transactions
and if you need to change anything in
between or like look at some
intermediate state or whatever like you
have to be careful about when the bank
is frozen like things like that if you
need to advance the slot and so it was a
little bit tricky to work with those
kinds of things to manipulate the
environment on the fly. And the other
thing that was difficult to do was like
setting up sisfars and just things like
that were not like super simple. Not
impossible but not super simple. I think
that that's a little bit easier to do
now too.
>> Another pattern that I've noticed is
that people directly use anchor test
like they write their program in anchor
and then they anchor creates this mocha
test for you and they use the ideal to
test against. So what is so what is the
best since you have built a lot of
onchain programs like what's the best
practice that people should adopt
especially when it comes to testing
should they test it via their ideal or
you know should they just directly have
their test cases at the
at the program level in Rust
>> I don't know I think it's you're asking
like where should you write them
>> yeah yeah I I think for for on one
practice I'm I'm actually what I'm
asking thing is what's the best pattern
should people write their test cases.
For example, if you're developing in
anchor, anchor by default creates this
test folder and inside it you could have
your entire you know test suite and
written in Mocha, right? So
the question that I'm asking is like how
does something something lightweight
very fast like molesk benefit them
because my because that actually ends up
spinning up like a test validator
deploys programs to it and then executes
all your
you know test cases against one state of
the validator right
>> and so the way I would do it I the way I
would recommend is
Like if it was me, I don't I don't write
a lot of Anchor programs anymore, but if
I was writing Anchor right now, I would
probably write a whole like suite of
unit tests in like so I would have like
program source, right? Like my program
code and then like program tests and in
programs I would write a slew of unit
tests for each instruction. And I
actually like this is what I do right
now. And so like if you have let's say
like three processors and like three
instructions like you usually have three
files. If you write it all in one file,
I mean maybe that's your jam, but like
usually people will split them into like
three different files. And so then you
just have like three different test
files. And like again, this is like just
what I would do. I'm not saying anyone
has to like get this granular or
anything, but you have each one mapped
to an instruction and then like go down
the line and each like test attribute
function should cover like a different
edge case or a different case in general
that your program is checking for. So
with anchor, this is actually a little
bit not obvious to test because the
framework does a lot of things for you
and what like you can configure the
context to do a lot of these like checks
and assertions and so you can test it
and make sure that the framework is
going to do what you expect. It's
probably a good thing to do. Um, but
it's not always super apparent like when
you write something in native, you
actually put the check there yourself.
So like you know what to look for. And
so I just go down the line of like the
program control flow like the logic and
just start at the top like what is the
first check that I see and it's usually
like this person is a ser okay first
test is going to be like fail this thing
isn't a signer. And then you you set up
a mo unit test and you make sure you get
the the error code that you're looking
for. You just go down the line and then
outside of the program source like the
program source and test folders what I
would do is I would use the anchor like
boilerplate setup and the client to do
an endto-end test with the test
validator. And the reason that I would
do it like this is because with the test
validator it's really good to get like a
gut check that you can start from zero
and like go through the whole like end
to end flow and nothing like craps out
in between. But when you're trying to
make sure that certain things fail,
it's actually better to have like really
quickfire unit tests that do one simple
thing. So then all your unit tests cover
all the failure cases and maybe you have
a success cases in there too, but you
they cover all your cases and then your
end to end is just like does it do the
thing that I built this thing to do, you
know, and like then you just worry about
that. And I think that's probably the
optimal way to do it. But like I said,
anybody is free to do testing and
development however they want. That's
just my jam.
>> I think one key distinction here is that
the anchor whatever tests you write in
anchor those are more integration test
because you're operating on one specific
state of the validator and then you're
you know keeping a
continue to make changes. The what is
the the interesting part about moisk is
that that now I I can actually use it
with a property testing module like
quick check. Now you I can exhaustively
test different corner cases,
right? So I I Yeah,
super interesting. I'm definitely going
to use uh Mullisk with quick check now.
>> Nice. Yeah, I haven't tried that yet,
but it should it should work just as you
said. I have used it for like benchmarks
because I wrote like a little compute
unit benchmarker and it's nothing really
fancy. All it does is just read the
final resulting compute unit value, but
it will make a little markdown file for
you. And so if you look at some of the
core programs that are in like the
Salana program organization, like a
bunch of the ones that Onzo maintains,
like the lookup table, like those have a
benchmarks folder. It's just called
benches, I think. And in it is a
markdown file. And I I' I've said this
multiple times, but I stole this from
Ankor. I took this idea from them. they
will benchmark all the CU usage of like
different APIs and types with new
releases. I thought that was super cool.
So I put this in as a feature and you
can like do it on a program. So if you
like make a change to dependencies or to
anything in your code, you can see the
change to the cus based on your
benchmarks.
And so that's been pretty neat. But
yeah, that was all Anchor's idea.
>> Awesome.
>> I just got a question. Do you have uh
any specific repositories that you
recommend u people look at where you
have both these set of tests uh on the
rust side and on on the client? Is there
any specific repo which has them well
documented so people can actually look
at it uh after the part?
>> I would say the solenoid program or has
a lot of really good unit test examples
but we don't have a lot of good examples
of testing with clients because like we
don't really use anchor at so I don't
have any good examples of that. I would
check out Blue Shift though. They
definitely do. But other other teams too
as well probably have good examples, but
we don't use a lot of Anchor.
>> Got it. Makes sense. And when you don't
use Anchor, you don't ever at all write
end to end tests with a client. They're
all written in Rust. I
>> I have written end to end tests in
native Rust. It's just like I haven't
done it in like our stuff. I've done it
in other stuff that I've helped other
people with that I can't really share.
>> Yeah. But but for our stuff, no, we have
some like there's some end toend tests
with like CLIs and whatnot, but I
wouldn't recommend those as being like
good examples. Some of them are like
really verbose or they're like ported
over from old tests.
I don't know. I think there's probably
better stuff out there.
>> What is the most quote unquote elegant
app you have seen in the Agawe codebase?
Like it probably shouldn't work, but it
does. I would say probably the craziest
was what was like I think feature
activations are pretty wild.
So like the way that it kind of works is
you have like the epic rollover phase
where like an epic ends at the end of
some slot and then the next slot is the
first slot of the next epic and in that
transition like between every slot
there's a process of like one bank
becomes a new bank. So like imagine like
a bank maps to a block pretty much they
do. Um it's more complex than that but
you can think about that for the
analogy. And so like each slot you get a
new bank that's made from the old one.
And in the one that's on the epic
boundary like a million things happen.
And we've been trying to like thin that
out like what happens there because it's
like obviously a big like compute job.
But the feature activations in
particular, I think are interesting
because it's like they all happen at
once. I mean, we only activate maybe one
or two at a time, but they are all right
there on that boundary and and if and
they're activated and then they are like
piped through all the source code. So
like to give you an example like if you
activate a feature you submit an account
like you submit a transaction to put an
account on chain under a certain owner
and the key is in the software like the
pub key is in the software and so once
that account exists during the epic
transition the runtime sees it and it
activates that logic gate and so it's
kind of clever but it's also like crazy
because it's like you have this
hardcoded address of an account that
doesn't exist, then somebody creates it
and causes this action to occur on the
live cluster during an epic transition.
And so there's another a bunch of
reasons why I think it's like an elegant
hack because like a reason I think it's
elegant is I think it's like a really
good idea and it's clever. But the
reason I think it's a kind of a hack is
because it's like it like flips
basically a logic gate all across the
entire validator, but on all validators
that do it.
>> So it's kind of like a crank, but
instead of someone externally triggering
it, you have it submit, you have it as
part of the code base.
>> I mean, I don't know a better
alternative to like activate a feature
on a cluster that needs to all do the
same thing at the same time. So, I think
it does make sense. But when I first
figured out how they work, I was kind of
mind blown. And you can go look at these
in the code. Like if you go through
bank, there's a like a part of the code
that says like new feature activations.
And so what it will do is like on that
boundary, it will look up all these pub
keys and see which ones exist that
didn't last epic. And it comes up with
this short list of like this these we
just found. Like we just found these
ones now. So, we got to go do something
with these. And then it'll go through
that short list and turn them all to
true. And like there's logic that is
like basically hooked into these for
like the first time they become active.
And so like the way the features
actually work is there's like two ways.
So like one is like there's an action
that happens as soon as it is activated
and it doesn't happen again. Then
there's also features that like once
they're active like this path is taken
instead of this one and then you
eventually never go back to this one.
So, it is clever. It makes sense. It's
just like when you see the code that
does it though, you're like, "Whoa, this
is kind of like wild. It's just like it
recognizes an account all of a sudden
randomly that like just appears and then
it just changes the behavior of the
validator." But it's pretty pretty cool,
I think.
>> Okay. One one more question. Uh, what
are your thoughts on Cindy 215?
>> I did I did try. I mean, dude, like I'm
a I'm a light client guy. Like I
understand why people want them and need
them and like I'm all for it, but
ultimately at the end of end of the day
like most of the devs are trying to make
the cluster faster and unless enough
people like stand up and say like here's
this thing I'm building and I need like
clients
like they're like we're gonna probably
make compromises that make the chain
faster. And that's exactly what happened
with 215. I mean, you could argue
whether or not there was enough
discussion on it. I don't really know. I
I would just What I'm trying to say is
like if enough people think that it
really stinks that we don't have good
like client support and it's something
that we need to fix, then we can do it.
Like no one's against it. But um until
this day, like there really hasn't been
a ton. There's some like there's
definitely some teams that have pushed
this idea forward, but it's not like
this giant outpouring of of projects. If
that was to happen, if a lot of people
were like, "Hey, this is like really
kind of terrible that we don't have
support for this, I think that would
change the game because like I
understand you want to have like
trustless bridging and you don't want to
have to do all these like weird things
and some of the guys that have figured
out how to do proving
like it's very um it's very difficult.
like you have to there's really no way
around like someone has to run a modded
node if you want to have anything that
you can use to do proofs and then you're
kind of like trusting this fork and so
it's not ideal. So, I'm all in favor of
like clients, but um I also think that
like
unless somebody is like, "Hey, let's not
make the chain faster because we need
this light client and here's why and
it's a compelling reason," then like
they're probably like the chain is
probably just going to get faster like
to be honest with you. Um but I'm
totally on board. If somebody wants to
like propose something or jam on it, I'm
on board. We talked a little bit in some
discussions on the SIMD repo, but um
yeah, I don't know. I think the idea has
just fallen a little bit flat sometimes
to be honest.
>> That's awesome. We we are towards the
end of the pod so just have one more
question. What what is what is one
feature that you're you know that you're
most excited about in SVM that what keep
what is that one thing that keeps you up
at night?
>> Um that's a good question. I think so.
So there's some things that keep me up
at night for the wrong reasons. But I
think that there's um I think the async
program execution sounds pretty cool and
it's an interesting problem to try to
solve because for anybody who's like
seen some of the discussion about it,
there's like this concept of like
execution domains. So like if if you
think about the thread pool concept of
like Solano's Calele and you know how
like if an account is ridable, right?
like you have to make sure that nobody
else is trying to write to it at the
same time. Like basic thread lock stuff.
But then you take that same concept and
you say like okay how do you set this up
so that like different kinds of
transactions like different kinds of
execution flows can happen at the same
time and we can isolate different types
of accounts from each other. And like
Anatoli has a good paper on this that I
don't know if it like kicked things off
or he just kind of jumped into the mix
when people were already talking about
this, but he talks about first like the
voting domain versus the rest of the
cluster is like a good way to
conceptualize this. So if you think
about like votes, there's really no need
that you would require like a vote
account to be writable unless you're
voting, right? So if I'm voting, I know
that the vote account is probably going
to be writable. Maybe not, but usually.
And so that's something that can happen
in vote land, right? But then something
else that's like a token transfer has
nothing to do with vote. Like it like
these are two separate worlds. So if you
have that as like a primitive in the
chain, that makes sense. And you can
build on that concept and you can try to
isolate different domains of accounts
that would be used together. And like
dude, you can profile blocks and figure
this out. Like you can look at what
dexes use. Like all this stuff is
related, you know? Like you don't have
some random protocol that Joe Blow wrote
that you include accounts from in your
like drift transaction. Just this
doesn't happen. So there you go. like
you have separation that you can do and
then you can parallelize more stuff and
you can have like pipelined approaches
to things that like you can basically
just have like super fast some stuff
that's super fast and like Hyperlid did
this and they did this for like some of
their dex stuff. Um, like don't ask me,
I'm not an expert about all the things
Hyperlquid, but reading some of their
docs, that's how they accomplished some
of their Perf stuff is they did some
pipelining around like transaction um,
whatever, like transaction domains and
Suie did this too. Um, so Salana did
this, we would probably squeeze out a
ton of performance with this. And I
think that that's a really cool idea
that would probably be great for the
chain. And with Alpenlow, I think I'm
not entirely sure if it's like directly
affected or not. I'd have to think about
it quite quite a bit, but um I think
that like combined those are really good
features to have for performance, you
know.
>> Thank you so much for joining us, too.
Been fantastic having you.
>> It was it was great chatting with you
guys. Hopefully, it was uh it was
interesting for some of the devs out
there. And yeah, if anybody's ever
curious about anything, whatever, you
can like tag me on Twitter or like find
me on Discord or Telegram or whatever.
Um maybe we could share some of the
handles um in like the description or
whatever. But yeah, happy to jam with
anybody who's down.
>> Thank you.